---
title: "Probabilistic Distributed Intrusion Detection For Zero-Trust Multi-Access Edge Computing"
date: 2023-05-12T15:48:08+11:00
draft: true
featured_image: "/images/phd.png"
tags: ["Research, Multi-Access Edge Computing, Mobile Edge Computing, Cyber Security, Intrusion Detection, Collaborative Intrusion Detection System, Zero Trust, 5G, Distributed System, DHT"]
---


My PhD thesis was uploaded onto The University of Melbourne archive and is available [here](http://hdl.handle.net/11343/337087)


The abstract of my thesis is as follows:

With the advent of Fifth Generation (5G) mobile networks, a diverse range of new computer networking technologies are being devised to meet the stringent demands of applications that require ultra-low latency, high bandwidth and geolocation-based services. Multi-Access Edge Computing (MEC) is a prominent example of such an emerging technology, which provides cloud computing services at the edge of the network using mobile base stations. This architectural shift of services from centralised cloud data centers to the network edge, helps reduce bandwidth usage and improve response time, meeting the ultra-low latency requirements laid out for 5G. However, MEC also inherits some of the security vulnerabilities affecting traditional networks and cloud computing, such as coordinated cyber attacks. This highlights a clear need for security mechanisms like Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), specifically Collaborative Intrusion Detection Systems (CIDS), which have proven to be effective in identifying attacks spread across multiple locations. However, identifying the right CIDS model for MEC is not straightforward due to the tradeoff between different factors such as detection accuracy, network overhead, computation and memory overhead. Most CIDS solutions for MEC use a cloud-based backend for offloading their heavy data processing tasks, introducing latency. Intrusion Detection becomes even more convoluted when modern security layers like zero trust are added onto MEC environments. These challenges highlight the need for purely edge-based CIDS architectures and mechanisms for MEC that can integrate well with modern security layers, and is an area that is yet to be explored.

This thesis addresses these challenges by first introducing a practical application use-case scenario using a car parking application running in MEC clusters. We then outline different attack patterns such as volumetric as well as stealthy attacks to compromise our application. This sets the base foundation for our subsequent chapters, where we propose architectures and techniques to detect these attacks in a MEC environment.

We then discuss the characteristics relevant for using different CIDS deployment models like a Centralised CIDS and a Distributed CIDS using Distributed Hash Tables (DHT) in a purely edge-based setting by evaluating them using a real-world worm dataset. Through experimentation, our results outline the trade-offs of these different edge-based CIDS architectures and highlight potential issues such as the DHT being prone to a memory bottleneck when attacks are focused on one or few nodes alone, which also limits its detection accuracy. In contrast, the Centralised CIDS provides a high detection accuracy while having a central point of failure while limiting scalability.

To address these bottlenecks identified in the Centralised as well as the Distributed CIDS using DHT, we propose a Hybrid CIDS. It combines the functionalities of the Centralised CIDS to perform attack detection in localised MEC clusters and the Distributed CIDS using DHT to share relevant focused context globally across multiple clusters. We evaluated its performance using a real-world worm dataset. Our results demonstrate that the Hybrid CIDS can detect distributed as well as focused attacks with a high detection accuracy, while removing the central point of failure in the system. It also addresses the memory bottleneck of the DHT by controlling the volume of data ingested into the DHT network using an exponential increase of threshold mechanism. This limits the data storage needs without compromising the detection accuracy of the global system.

Finally, we discuss the addition of modern security layers like zero trust in MEC environments and the potential gaps in its security posture. We show that malicious traffic passing the authentication and authorisation controls of zero trust setups could compromise services in a stealthy manner. Since MEC is a platform for third-party application developers to deploy their applications at scale, a vulnerability in one application or system setup could be replicated across multiple clusters easily. To detect such malicious behavior in zero trust enabled MEC at scale, we propose a tree-based probabilistic CIDS architecture called Prob CIDS. This architecture uses probabilistic dissemination of alerts based on the severity of the event, so that low severity events can still be correlated without overwhelming the CIDS. We evaluated its performance using telemetry data generated from a real-world application deployed across multiple zero trust based clusters. Our results demonstrate that Prob CIDS has a high detection accuracy in detecting both volumetric as well as stealthy attacks that pass the security controls of zero trust, as compared to other CIDS architectures. We also demonstrate that features like the damping factor used in Prob CIDS can address the memory bottleneck of DHTs effectively, while reducing false positives in a drifting traffic scenario.